Roadmap.md: Discuss the near term future of rust-libp2p (#2997)
paritytech/rust-libp2p: ROADMAP.md

Long term we should enable rust-libp2p running in the browser via WASM to use the browser's WebRTC
stack. Though that should only happen after improved WASM support, see below.

## Cross Behaviour communication

| Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies                                      | Dependents                                    |
|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| todo   | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2680 | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2832 | [Kademlia client mode](#kademlia-client-mode) |

Today `NetworkBehaviour` implementations like Kademlia, GossipSub or Circuit Relay v2 can not
communicate with each other, i.e. can not make use of information known by another
`NetworkBehaviour` implementation. First step would be to exchange standard information about remote
peers (e.g. supported protocols).

Long term we might consider a generic approach for `NetworkBehaviours` to exchange data. Though that

> would deserve its own roadmap item.

Reviewer: I think this is an important item that we should work on because it will be a nice ergonomic improvement for our users. At the same time though, it is only just that: An ergonomic improvement. A user can integrate identify and kademlia today, they just need to write a bit of code for it.

With that in mind, I think we should remove this item from this roadmap.

Author: I would like to keep the paragraph here to stress that generic cross-behaviour-communication is **not** on the roadmap. Otherwise folks might confuse the scope of  this roadmap item.

Reviewer: I am talking about the entire roadmap item, not just the generic approach :)

Author: I think we should prioritize it. In my eyes having this feature significantly reduces the amount of complexity forced onto new users.

## Generic connection management

| Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies | Dependents |
|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|
| todo   | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2824 |              |            |

See https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2824 for motivation. Given that this will enable
downstream users to easier integrate with rust-libp2p, I think this counts as a "improving existing
components" over "introducing a new component".

> First draft is in https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2828

Reviewer: My thoughts on this one are similar to cross-behaviour communication but it is a little less clear because you need to work around the fact that connections get established first and a behaviour would have to instantly kill it again. This might get the job done but is a bit hacky.

I am inclined to say that this should either also be removed or grouped under a "Developer ergonomics" heading.

Author: > This might get the job done but is a bit hacky.

As an aside, that is how https://github.com/sigp/lighthouse and https://github.com/paritytech/substrate do it today.

> I am inclined to say that this should either also be removed or grouped under a "Developer ergonomics" heading.

In my eyes, this goes beyond ergonomics. I.e. it enables users to implement a clean eclipse defense.

Reviewer: Perhaps it should go under a "Security" heading then?

## Kademlia efficient querying

| Status      | Target Completion | Tracking                                        | Dependencies | Dependents |
|-------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|
| in progress | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2712 |              |            |

Users of rust-libp2p like [iroh](https://github.com/n0-computer/iroh) need this for low latency
usage of `libp2p-kad`. The rust-libp2p maintainers can pick this up unless iroh folks finish the
work before that.

## Kademlia client mode

| Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies                                                    | Dependents |
|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| todo   | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2032 | [Cross behaviour communication](#cross-behaviour-communication) |            |

Kademlia client mode will enhance routing table health and thus have a positive impact on all

> Kademlia operations.

Reviewer: I think these could go under a heading "Improving runtime efficiency".

Author: I am confused. Why is Kademlia a runtime or part of a runtime? Or as in "at run time"?

Reviewer: The latter. A better term is probably "Performance improvements".

`v0.43.0`](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/releases/tag/v0.43.0), see also
https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2052. We are currently collecting data via the
[punchr](https://github.com/dennis-tra/punchr) project on the hole punching success rate. See also
[call for
action](https://discuss.libp2p.io/t/decentralized-nat-hole-punching-measurement-campaign/1616) in
case you want to help. Based on this data we will likely find many optimizations we can do to our
hole punching stack.

## Streaming response protocol aka. the ultimate escape hatch

| Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies | Dependents |
|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|
| todo   | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2657 |              |            |

rust-libp2p is very opinionated on how to write peer-to-peer protocols. There are many good reasons
for this, and I think we should not change directions here. That said, the ultimate escape hatch -
allowing users to create a stream and do whatever they want with it - will make it easier for

> newcomers to get started.

Reviewer: My way of looking at this is that we should make it easier for users to write `NetworkBehaviour`s instead of giving them an escape hatch, hence I think we should remove this.

What we could do is add an item to the "Developer Ergonomics" heading (if you end up introducing it) that briefly mentions "Implementations of custom protocols".

Author: > My way of looking at this is that we should make it easier for users to write `NetworkBehaviour`s instead of giving them an escape hatch, hence I think we should remove this.

I am still undecided here. I think we need to do both. I fear that we will never be able to make `NetworkBehaviour` (a) easy enough for a newcomer to implement a proof-of-concept, while (b) still supporting advanced protocols like Kademlia, Gossipsub and BitSwap.

I suggest we continue experimenting with both. I don't have an opinion on which one to prioritize.

don't have high demand for this feature from the community. (One could argue that that demand
follows this roadmap item and not the other way round.)

## Handshake optimizations

| Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                                                                                                                                | Dependencies | Dependents |
|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|
| todo   | Q2/2023           | Security protocol in multiaddr https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/353 and early muxer negotiation https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2994 |              |            |

Short term, investing into rust-libp2p's QUIC support will likely give us a larger performance win,
thus neither of the two optimizations is planned for 2022. While great to have, it has not been
requested from any rust-libp2p users.

Long term, given that this will give us a great performance gain, we should definitely tackle it. It

> also allows us to catch up and thus be consistent with go-libp2p.

Reviewer: This could be grouped into "performance optimisations" as well.

# rust-libp2p Roadmap

> Below is a high level roadmap for the rust-libp2p project. Items are ordered by priority (high to

Reviewer 2: Additional things to potentially cover:
1. Link to the specs vision roadmap (which should ideally cover core tenets of the project like security, stability, performance, and specs first).  I suggested to @p-shahi in https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/pull/1831#discussion_r998906511 to factor some of the tenets there so we can link to them from the various libp2p implementation roadmaps.
2. How does someone leave feedback or comments.  go-libp2p and testground went with a pinned tracking issue with a comment at the top: https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/blob/master/ROADMAP.md#go-libp2p-roadmap-q422q123
3. I think we need to add notes about how interoperability and performance testing are critical initiatives for the project and in many cases take higher priority than other initiatives listed here.  go-libp2p has some notes on this here: https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/pull/1831

Reviewer 2: @mxinden : I'd like to get a callout about us focusing on interoperability testing right now.  go-libp2p has this here: https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/blob/master/ROADMAP.md#benchmarking-and-testing

Reviewer 2: We can do the work here: https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/3091

low).

> For a more detailed view see https://github.com/orgs/libp2p/projects/4/views/1.

Reviewer 2: A couple of things:
1. That project board is private
2. Maybe rename it to "rust-libp2p Detailed Roadmap"
3. Add a readme https://github.com/orgs/libp2p/projects/4/settings  ?  It can have a note pointing back to this document.

Reviewer 2: @mxinden : I took care of 2 and 3.  I can't do 3 (I think because I don't have sufficient permissions.)

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->
**Table of Contents**

> - [rust-libp2p Roadmap](#rust-libp2p-roadmap)

Reviewer 2: (nit) This isn't needed/useful in the TOC.

    - [TLS support](#tls-support)
    - [Experimental QUIC support](#experimental-quic-support)
    - [WebRTC support (browser-to-server)](#webrtc-support-browser-to-server)
    - [Cross Behaviour communication](#cross-behaviour-communication)
    - [Generic connection management](#generic-connection-management)
    - [Kademlia efficient querying](#kademlia-efficient-querying)
    - [Kademlia client mode](#kademlia-client-mode)
    - [Optimize Hole punching](#optimize-hole-punching)
    - [Streaming response protocol aka. the ultimate escape hatch](#streaming-response-protocol-aka-the-ultimate-escape-hatch)
    - [Improved WASM support](#improved-wasm-support)
    - [Handshake optimizations](#handshake-optimizations)
    - [Bitswap implementation](#bitswap-implementation)
    - [WebTransport](#webtransport)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## TLS support

| Category     | Status      | Target Completion | Tracking                                        | Dependencies                       | Dependents |
|--------------|-------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------|

> | Connectivity | In progress | Q4/2022           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2945 | [QUIC](#experimental-quic-support) |            |

Reviewer 2: Minor but I think "QUIC" is a dependent rather than a dependency.

This allows us to secure both TCP and QUIC connections using TLS. This is a requirement for QUIC
support. Running TLS on top of TCP is a nice to have, since we already have noise.

> ## Experimental QUIC support

Reviewer 2: What will a stakehodler get frome experimental QUIC support vs. full support?  Will we not have "Transport::dial_as_listener to support hole-punching"?  Do we feel good about anyone putting production workloads on this?  

As a stakeholder, I would imagine production support and completion is what someone ultimately cares about. If we are breaking that into a separate roadmap item, is there a reason it's not on the list?   I would only imagine leaving something in an experimental state if we're not sure about it's utility or the API to expose, but we already know we need QUIC in production, so why not accelerate completing this?

Author: Good point. With the above in mind, I suggest making the effort beyond the first iteration part of this roadmap item and thus prioritizing it.

https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2622. More specifically the server side. This will enable
browser nodes to connect to rust-libp2p nodes where the latter only have self-signed TLS
certificates. See https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/412 for in-depth motivation.

Long term we should enable rust-libp2p running in the browser via WASM to use the browser's WebRTC
stack. Though that should only happen after improved WASM support, see below.

## Cross Behaviour communication

| Category             | Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies                                      | Dependents                                    |
|----------------------|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Developer ergonomics | todo   | Q1/2023           | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2680 | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2832 | [Kademlia client mode](#kademlia-client-mode) |

Today `NetworkBehaviour` implementations like Kademlia, GossipSub or Circuit Relay v2 can not

> communicate with each other, i.e. can not make use of information known by another

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
communicate with each other, i.e. cannot make use of information known by another
```

> `NetworkBehaviour` implementation. Users need to write the wiring code by hand to e.g. enable

Reviewer 2: I don't know: is this a big deal?  Is this common for rust-libp2p users to need to do?

Will rust-libp2p users look at this item and think, "awesome, I've been waiting for this.  This will make my application development so much easier"?

On the surface this reads like an internal refactor, and I am just checking to make sure this carries enough weight to be listed here.  

If we don't view this as an important stakeholder milestone, this can be an implementation endeavor for "Kademlia client mode"

Author: In my eyes this is important beyond Kademlia. Given that all users currently have to do this manually, I do expect folks appreciating the change and looking forward to it.

Short term, investing into rust-libp2p's QUIC support will likely give us a larger performance win,
thus neither of the two optimizations is planned for 2022. While great to have, it has not been
requested from any rust-libp2p users.

Long term, given that this will give us a great performance gain, we should definitely tackle it. It
also allows us to catch up and thus be consistent with go-libp2p.

## Bitswap implementation

| Category | Status | Target Completion | Tracking                                          | Dependencies | Dependents |
|----------|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|
|          | todo   |                   | https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2632 |              |            |

I think this is a common component that many users need to build peer-to-peer applications. In
addition, it is very performance critical and thus likely challenges many of our existing designs in
rust-libp2p.

I would prioritize it below [handshake optimization](#handshake-optimizations) following the
convention of improving existing components over introducing new ones. Users have and can implement

> their own implementations and are thus not blocked on the rust-libp2p project.

Reviewer 2: Would other groups like numober0/iroh consider contributing this?

Author: We have been talking about this with them. Maybe.

Author: See also conversation in https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2632.

**Table of Contents**

- [rust-libp2p Roadmap](#rust-libp2p-roadmap)
    - [Testground abstraction](#testground-abstraction)
    - [TLS support](#tls-support)
    - [QUIC support](#quic-support)
    - [WebRTC support (browser-to-server)](#webrtc-support-browser-to-server)
    - [Release process](#release-process)
    - [Refactor event handling in `Swarm`](#refactor-event-handling-in-swarm)
    - [Cross Behaviour communication](#cross-behaviour-communication)
    - [swarm/handler: Decouple ConnectionHandler from {In,Out}boundUpgrade #2863](#swarmhandler-decouple-connectionhandler-from-inoutboundupgrade-2863)
    - [Generic connection management](#generic-connection-management)
    - [Kademlia efficient querying](#kademlia-efficient-querying)
    - [Kademlia client mode](#kademlia-client-mode)
    - [Hole punching](#hole-punching)
    - [Streaming response protocol aka. the ultimate escape hatch](#streaming-response-protocol-aka-the-ultimate-escape-hatch)
    - [Improved WASM support](#improved-wasm-support)
    - [Muxer handshake optimization](#muxer-handshake-optimization)
    - [Bitswap implementation](#bitswap-implementation)

>     - [WebTransport](#webtransport)

Reviewer 3: There are 17 items here, do you think it's feasible to ship all of them in the next two quarters? For ones that are lower priority and will likely not get shipped in the next two quarters, I suggest omitting them from this document

Reviewer 2: While not critical, I think it's ok/good to have them in the document, but it should be clear that they are unplanned for the next 6 month.  The value in keeping them in my opinion is:
1. it gives clarity to what you said "no" to.  If someone cares about one of those initiatives, it's clear that we thought about it and chose no.
2. It gives a nod to things we'd consider for the future.

Feel free to dump them as well though if that's easier.

Author: I am also in favor of tracking items beyond the next 6 months.

I am adding a _target completion_ property to each item. I will specifically mark the items that I expect to be beyond the next 6 month.

Reviewer 3: Cool that makes sense.

>     - [WebTransport](#webtransport)

Reviewer: All of these are exciting!

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## Testground abstraction

Status: todo

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Target completion: <End of Q4/Early Q1/Mid Q1/End of Q1/etc.>

```
I strongly suggest adding a target completion in each item. The roadmaps intention is to communicate the milestones within each project i.e. when we expect to ship improvements or features. A target completion will help set up expectations with external teams/collaborators/users.

We can take a similar approach to go-libp2p where each roadmap item was deconstructed into smaller deliverables and with an estimated target completion:
https://www.notion.so/Milestone-Roadmap-a90d888d6bf14b999131ea7a802c9960 (It's in Notion now but will make its way back to markdown document today)

Reviewer 2: Agreed.  Given an indication of what we're thinking will land when is important for stakeholders.  Monthly granularity is good.  If you need to do quarters, that's fine.  Without some estimated dates, it's hard for a stakeholder to make plans.  For example, if I see something I really care about that is in the distant future, I at least know that and can respond accordingly (e.g., wait, jump in to bring it in, see if can convince about prioritization).

A brief mapping of milestones to dates like to go-libp2p does here works: https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/pull/1804

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Priority: <P0/P1/P2>

```
Suggest adding a relative priority to each roadmap item here as well. It is hard to discern which items are most critical vs which are nice to haves.

Author: The roadmap items already express relative priority through the order in which the items are listed. What value would an additional _priority_ property per roadmap item bring? In other words, what questions would this property help answer?

> It is hard to discern which items are most critical vs which are nice to haves.

I consider all items on this roadmap important, i.e. worth doing eventually.

Reviewer 3: > The roadmap items already express relative priority through the order in which the items are listed. What value would an additional priority property per roadmap item bring? In other words, what questions would this property help answer?

I see since that's the case then I agree, an additional priority property would not bring any additional value.

But it wasn't evident that it was listed in order of descending priority when I first reviewed it. The addition of `Target completion:` helps.
My suggestion is to add a blurb at the top of this doc and say as much, this will help new readers out.

Reviewer 3: Oh nevermind you actually specified it in the description
>The items in this roadmap are ordered by importance where I define importance as:

My bad

Author: > My suggestion is to add a blurb at the top of this doc and say as much, this will help new readers out.

Good idea @p-shahi. Added with https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2997/commits/aed8b29ceff9e963e494b11d27efe61c47f53f91.

Dependencies:
- [TLS](#tls-support)
- [Testground](#testground)

Dependents:

QUIC has been on the roadmap for a long time. It enables various performance improvements as well as
higher hole punching success rates. We are close to finishing a first version with
https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2289. Long term there is lots more to do, see tracking
issue https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2883.

## WebRTC support (browser-to-server)

Status: In progress

Tracking: https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/412

Dependencies:
- [TLS](#tls-support)
- [Testground](#testground)

Dependents:

We are currently implementing WebRTC for **browser-to-server** connectivity in
https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2622. More specifically the server side. This will enable
browser nodes to connect to rust-libp2p nodes where the latter only have self-signed TLS
certificates. See https://github.com/libp2p/specs/pull/412 for in-depth motivation.

Long term we should enable rust-libp2p running in the browser via WASM to use the browser's WebRTC
stack. Though that should only happen after improved WASM support, see below.

> ## Release process

Reviewer 3: I would omit this from the roadmap as this item can be characterized as "ongoing project maintenance work."

Reviewer 2: Agreed that this isn't something that belongs on the stakeholder roadmap.  Per https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XJiFG9tTCDi4RsKEAivHgcXueIqqwhkJDE-OKvy8yec/edit#heading=h.vwnoff9vzgnf, "Each milestone should be scoped to a real-world, externalizable deliverable - something that matters to your users or collaborators in a notable way"

That said, getting a release process documented/established is one of the first things I would want us to do from an engineering regard.  Basically, I believe it belong at/near the top of the engineering team roadmap, but not hear for external stakeholders.

Author: :+1: removed with 53a74578.

allowing users to create a stream and do whatever they want with it - will make it easier for
newcomers to get started.

## Improved WASM support

Status: todo

Tracking: https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2617

Dependencies:

Dependents:

- WebRTC browser-to-browser and browser side

This opens rust-libp2p to hole new set of use-cases.

## Muxer handshake optimization

Status: todo

Tracking: https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2994

I suggest we do not prioritize this. On the performance end, investing into QUIC support seems like
the better bet. Long term this is a wonderful improvement, likely very much appreciated by users
though not thus far demanded.

## Bitswap implementation

Status: todo

Tracking: https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2632

I think this is a common component that many users need to build peer-to-peer applications. In
addition, it is very performance critical and thus likely challenges many of our existing designs in
rust-libp2p.

I would prioritize it below [Muxer handshake optimization](#muxer-handshake-optimization) following
the convention of improving existing components over introducing new ones. Users have and can

> implement their own implementations and are thus not blocked on the rust-libp2p project.

Reviewer: Why included these here if they are low priority?

Author: I consider all items on this roadmap worth doing eventually. Given that we are resource constraint we have to make trade offs somewhere. That said, I do think it is worth tracking them here for future planning.

I suggest we move this discussion to https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/2997#discussion_r989168789. I am resolving here.
